The £1,000,000 Bank-Note
Mark Twain
When I was twenty-seven years old, I was a mining-broker’s clerk in San Francisco, and an
expert in all the details of stock traffic. I was alone in the world, and had nothing to depend
upon but my wits and a clean reputation; but these were setting my feet in the road to eventual
fortune, and I was content with the prospect.
My time was my own after the afternoon board, Saturdays, and I was accustomed to put it in on
a little sail-boat on the bay. One day I ventured too far, and was carried out to sea. Just at
nightfall, when hope was about gone, I was picked up by a small brig which was bound for
London. It was a long and stormy voyage, and they made me work my passage without pay, as a
common sailor. When I stepped ashore in London my clothes were ragged and shabby, and I
had only a dollar in my pocket. This money fed and sheltered me twenty-four hours. During the
next twenty-four I went without food and shelter.
About ten o’clock on the following morning, seedy and hungry, I was dragging myself along
Portland Place, when a child that was passing, towed by a nursemaid, tossed a luscious big pear
—minus one bite—into the gutter. I stopped, of course, and fastened my desiring eye on that
muddy treasure. My mouth watered for it, my stomach craved it, my whole being begged for it.
But every time I made a move to get it some passing eye detected my purpose, and of course I
straightened up, then, and looked indifferent, and pretended that I hadn’t been thinking about
the pear at all. This same thing kept happening and happening, and I couldn’t get the pear. I
was just getting desperate enough to brave all the shame, and to seize it, when a window behind
me was raised, and a gentleman spoke out of it, saying:
‘Step in here, please.’
I was admitted by a gorgeous flunkey, and shown into a sumptuous room where a couple of
elderly gentlemen were sitting. They sent away the servant, and made me sit down. They had
just finished their breakfast, and the sight of the remains of it almost overpowered me. I could
hardly keep my wits together in the presence of that food, but as I was not asked to sample it, I
had to bear my trouble as best I could.
Now, something had been happening there a little before, which I did not know anything about
until a good many days afterwards, but I will tell you about it now. Those two old brothers had
been having a pretty hot argument a couple of days before, and had ended by agreeing to decide
it by a bet, which is the English way of settling everything.
You will remember that the Bank of England once issued two notes of a million pounds each, to
be used for a special purpose connected with some public transaction with a foreign country.
For some reason or other only one of these had been used and cancelled; the other still lay in the
vaults of the Bank. Well, the brothers, chatting along, happened to get to wondering what might
be the fate of a perfectly honest and intelligent stranger who should be turned adrift in London
without a friend, and with no money but that million-pound bank-note, and no way to account
for his being in possession of it. Brother A said he would starve to death; Brother B said he
wouldn’t. Brother A said he couldn’t offer it at a bank or anywhere else, because he would be
arrested on the spot. So they went on disputing till Brother B said he would bet twenty thousand
pounds that the man would live thirty days, any way, on that million, and keep out of jail, too.
Brother A took him up. Brother B went down to the Bank and bought that note. Just like an
Englishman, you see; pluck to the backbone. Then he dictated a letter, which one of his clerks
wrote out in a beautiful round hand, and then the two brothers sat at the window a whole day
watching for the right man to give it to.
They saw many honest faces go by that were not intelligent enough; many that were
intelligent but not honest enough; many that were both, but the possessors were not poor
enough, or, if poor enough, were not strangers. There was always a defect, until I came
along; but they agreed that I filled the bill all around; so they elected me unanimously, and
there I was, now, waiting to know why I was called in. They began to ask me questions
about myself, and pretty soon they had my story. Finally they told me I would answer their
purpose. I said I was sincerely glad, and asked what it was. Then one of them handed me an
envelope, and said I would find the explanation inside. I was going to open it, but he said
no; take it to my lodgings, and look it over carefully, and not be hasty or rash. I was puzzled,
and wanted to discuss the matter a little further, but they didn’t; so I took my leave, feeling
hurt and insulted to be made the butt of what was apparently some kind of a practical joke,
and yet obliged to put up with it, not being in circumstances to resent affronts from rich and
strong folk.
I would have picked up the pear, now, and eaten it before all the world, but it was gone; so I
had lost that by this unlucky business, and the thought of it did not soften my feeling
towards those men. As soon as I was out of sight of that house I opened my envelope, and
saw that it contained money! My opinion of those people changed, I can tell you! I lost not a
moment, but shoved note and money into my vest-pocket, and broke for the nearest cheap
eating-house. Well, how I did eat! When at last I couldn’t hold any more, I took out my
money and unfolded it, took one glimpse and nearly fainted. Five millions of dollars! Why,
it made my head swim.
I must have sat there stunned and blinking at the note as much as a minute before I came
rightly to myself again. The first thing I noticed, then, was the landlord. His eye was on the
note, and he was petrified. He was worshipping, with all his body and soul, but he looked as
if he couldn’t stir hand or foot. I took my cue in a moment, and did the only rational thing
there was to do. I reached the note towards him, and said carelessly:
‘Give me the change, please.’
Then he was restored to his normal condition, and made a thousand apologies for not being
able to break the bill, and I couldn’t get him to touch it. He wanted to look at it, and keep on
looking at it; he couldn’t seem to get enough of it to quench the thirst of his eye, but he
shrank from touching it as if it had been something too sacred for poor common clay to
handle. I said:
‘I am sorry if it is an inconvenience, but I must insist. Please change it; I haven’t anything
else.’
But he said that wasn’t any matter; he was quite willing to let the trifle stand over till
another time. I said I might not be in his neighbourhood again for a good while; but he said
it was of no consequence, he could wait, and, moreover, I could have anything I wanted, any
time I chose, and let the account run as long as I pleased. He said he hoped he wasn’t afraid
to trust as rich a gentleman as I was, merely because I was of a merry disposition, and chose
to play larks on the public in the matter of dress. By this time another customer was
entering, and the landlord hinted to me to put the monster out of sight; then he bowed me
all the way to the door, and I started straight for that house and those brothers, to correct
the mistake which had been made before the police should hunt me up, and help me do it. I
was pretty nervous, in fact pretty badly frightened, though, of course, I was no way in fault;
but I knew men well enough to know that when they find they’ve given a tramp a million-
pound bill when they thought it was a one-pounder, they are in a frantic rage against him
instead of quarrelling with their own near-sightedness, as they ought. As I approached the
house my excitement began to abate, for all was quiet there, which made me feel pretty sure
the blunder was not discovered yet. I rang. The same servant appeared. I asked for those
gentlemen.
‘They are gone.’ This in the lofty, cold way of that fellow’s tribe.
‘Gone? Gone where?’
‘On a journey.’
‘But whereabouts?’
‘To the Continent, I think.’
‘The Continent?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Which way—by what route?’
‘I can’t say, sir.’
‘When will they be back?’
‘In a month, they said.’
‘A month! Oh, this is awful! Give me some sort of idea of how to get a word to them. It’s of
the last importance.’
‘I can’t, indeed. I’ve no idea where they’ve gone, sir.’
‘Then I must see some member of the family.’
‘Family’s away too; been abroad months—in Egypt and India, I think.’
‘Man, there’s been an immense mistake made. They’ll be back before night. Will you tell
them I’ve been here, and that I will keep coming till it’s all made right, and they needn’t be
afraid?’
‘I’ll tell them, if they come back, but I am not expecting them. They said you would be here
in an hour to make inquiries, but I must tell you it’s all right, they’ll be here on time and
expect you.’
So I had to give it up and go away. What a riddle it all was! I was like to lose my mind. They
would be here ‘on time.’ What could that mean? Oh, the letter would explain, maybe. I had
forgotten the letter; I got it out and read it. This is what it said:
‘You are an intelligent and honest man, as one may see by your face. We conceive you to be
poor and a stranger. Enclosed you will find a sum of money. It is lent to you for thirty days,
without interest. Report at this house at the end of that time. I have a bet on you. If I win it
you shall have any situation that is in my gift—any, that is, that you shall be able to prove
yourself familiar with and competent to fill.’
No signature, no address, no date.
Well, here was a coil to be in! You are posted on what had preceded all this, but I was not. It
was just a deep, dark puzzle to me. I hadn’t the least idea what the game was, nor whether
harm was meant me or a kindness. I went into a park, and sat down to try to think it out,
and to consider what I had best do.
At the end of an hour, my reasonings had crystallised into this verdict.
Maybe those men mean me well, maybe they mean me ill; no way to decide that—let it go.
They’ve got a game, or a scheme, or an experiment of some kind on hand; no way to
determine what it is—let it go. There’s a bet on me; no way to find out what it is—let it go.
That disposes of the indeterminable quantities; the remainder of the matter is tangible,
solid, and may be classed and labelled with certainty. If I ask the Bank of England to place
this bill to the credit of the man it belongs to, they’ll do it, for they know him, although I
don’t; but they will ask me how I came in possession of it, and if I tell the truth, they’ll put
me in the asylum, naturally, and a lie will land me in jail. The same result would follow if I
tried to bank the bill anywhere or to borrow money on it. I have got to carry this immense
burden around until those men come back, whether I want to or not. It is useless to me, as
useless as a handful of ashes, and yet I must take care of it, and watch over it, while I beg my
living. I couldn’t give it away, if I should try, for neither honest citizen nor highwayman
would accept it or meddle with it for anything. Those brothers are safe. Even if I lose their
bill, or burn it, they are still safe, because they can stop payment, and the Bank will make
them whole; but meantime, I’ve got to do a month’s suffering without wages or profit—
unless I help win that bet, whatever it may be, and get that situation that I am promised. I
should like to get that; men of their sort have situations in their gift that are worth having.
I got to thinking a good deal about that situation. My hopes began to rise high. Without
doubt the salary would be large. It would begin in a month; after that I should be all right.
Pretty soon I was feeling first-rate. By this time I was tramping the streets again. The sight
of a tailor-shop gave me a sharp longing to shed my rags, and to clothe myself decently once
more. Could I afford it? No; I had nothing in the world but a million pounds. So I forced
myself to go on by. But soon I was drifting back again. The temptation persecuted me
cruelly. I must have passed that shop back and forth six times during that manful struggle.
At last I gave in; I had to. I asked if they had a misfit suit that had been thrown on their
hands. The fellow I spoke to nodded his head towards another fellow, and gave me no
answer. I went to the indicated fellow, and he indicated another fellow with his head, and
no words. I went to him, and he said:
‘’Tend to you presently.’
I waited till he was done with what he was at, then he took me into a back room, and
overhauled a pile of rejected suits, and selected the rattiest one for me. I put it on. It didn’t
fit, and wasn’t in any way attractive, but it was new, and I was anxious to have it; so I didn’t
find any fault, but said with some diffidence:
‘It would be an accommodation to me if you could wait some days for the money. I haven’t
any small change about me.’
The fellow worked up a most sarcastic expression of countenance, and said:
‘Oh, you haven’t? Well, of course, I didn’t expect it. I’d only expect gentlemen like you to
carry large change.’
I was nettled, and said:
‘My friend, you shouldn’t judge a stranger always by the clothes he wears. I am quite able to
pay for this suit; I simply didn’t wish to put you to the trouble of changing a large note.’
He modified his style a little at that, and said, though still with something of an air:
‘I didn’t mean any particular harm, but as long as rebukes are going, I might say it wasn’t
quite your affair to jump to the conclusion that we couldn’t change any note that you might
happen to be carrying around. On the contrary, we can.’
I handed the note to him, and said:
‘Oh, very well; I apologise.’
He received it with a smile, one of those large smiles which goes all around over, and has
folds in it, and wrinkles, and spirals, and looks like the place where you have thrown a brick
in a pond; and then in the act of his taking a glimpse of the bill this smile froze solid, and
turned yellow, and looked like those wavy, wormy spreads of lava which you find hardened
on little levels on the side of Vesuvius. I never before saw a smile caught like that, and
perpetuated. The man stood there holding the bill, and looking like that, and the proprietor
hustled up to see what was the matter, and said briskly:
‘Well, what’s up? what’s the trouble? what’s wanting?’
I said, ‘There isn’t any trouble. I’m waiting for my change.’
‘Come, come; get him his change, Tod; get him his change.’
Tod retorted: ‘Get him his change! It’s easy to say, sir; but look at the bill yourself.’
The proprietor took a look, gave a low, eloquent whistle, then made a dive for the pile of
rejected clothing, and began to snatch it this way and that, talking all the time excitedly, and
as if to himself:
‘Sell an eccentric millionaire such an unspeakable suit as that! Tod’s a fool—a born fool.
Always doing something like this. Drives every millionaire away from this place, because he
can’t tell a millionaire from a tramp, and never could. Ah, here’s the thing I’m after. Please
get those things off, sir, and throw them in the fire. Do me the favour to put on this shirt
and this suit; it’s just the thing, the very thing—plain, rich, modest, and just ducally nobby;
made to order for a foreign prince—you may know him, sir, his Serene Highness the
Hospodar of Halifax; had to leave it with us and take a mourning-suit because his mother
was going to die—which she didn’t. But that’s all right; we can’t always have things the way
we—that is, the way they—there! trousers all right, they fit you to a charm, sir; now the
waistcoat: aha, right again! now the coat—lord! look at that, now! Perfect, the whole thing! I
never saw such a triumph in all my experience.’
I expressed my satisfaction.
‘Quite right, sir, quite right; it’ll do for a makeshift, I’m bound to say. But wait till you see
what we’ll get up for you on your own measure. Come, Tod, book and pen; get at it. Length
of leg, 32’—and so on. Before I could get in a word he had measured me, and was giving
orders for dress-suits, morning suits, shirts, and all sorts of things. When I got a chance I
said:
‘But, my dear sir, I can’t give these orders, unless you can wait indefinitely, or change the
bill.’
‘Indefinitely! It’s a weak word, sir, a weak word. Eternally—that’s the word, sir. Tod, rush
these things through, and send them to the gentleman’s address without any waste of time.
Let the minor customers wait. Set down the gentleman’s address and——’
‘I’m changing my quarters. I will drop in and leave the new address.’
‘Quite right, sir, quite right. One moment—let me show you out, sir. There—good day, sir,
good day.’
Well, don’t you see what was bound to happen? I drifted naturally into buying whatever I
wanted, and asking for change. Within a week I was sumptuously equipped with all needful
comforts and luxuries, and was housed in an expensive private hotel in Hanover Square. I
took my dinners there, but for breakfast I stuck by Harris’s humble feeding-house, where I
had got my first meal on my million-pound bill. I was the making of Harris. The fact had
gone all abroad that the foreign crank who carried million-pound bills in his vest-pocket
was the patron saint of the place. That was enough. From being a poor, struggling, little
hand-to-mouth enterprise, it had become celebrated, and overcrowded with customers.
Harris was so grateful that he forced loans upon me, and would not be denied; and so,
pauper as I was, I had money to spend, and was living like the rich and the great. I judged
that there was going to be a crash by and by, but I was in, now, and must swim across or
drown. You see there was just that element of impending disaster to give a serious side, a
sober side, yes, a tragic side, to a state of things which would otherwise have been purely
ridiculous. In the night, in the dark, the tragedy part was always to the front, and always
warning, always threatening; and so I moaned and tossed, and sleep was hard to find. But in
the cheerful daylight the tragedy element faded out and disappeared, and I walked on air,
and was happy to giddiness, to intoxication, you may say.
And it was natural; for I had become one of the notorieties of the metropolis of the world,
and it turned my head, not just a little, but a good deal. You could not take up a newspaper,
English, Scotch, or Irish, without finding in it one or more references to the ‘vest-pocket
million-pounder’ and his latest doings and sayings. At first, in these mentions, I was at the
bottom of the personal gossip column; next, I was listed above the knights, next above the
baronets, next above the barons, and so on, and so on, climbing steadily, as my notoriety
augmented, until I reached the highest altitude possible, and there I remained, taking
precedence of all dukes not royal, and of all ecclesiastics except the Primate of all England.
But, mind, this was not fame; as yet I had achieved only notoriety. Then came the climaxing
stroke—the accolade, so to speak—which in a single instance transmuted the perishable
dross of notoriety into the enduring gold of fame: ‘Punch’ caricatured me! Yes, I was a made
man, now: my place was established. I might be joked about still, but reverently, not
hilariously, not rudely; I could be smiled at, but not laughed at. The time for that had gone
by. ‘Punch’ pictured me all a-flutter with rags, dickering with a beefeater for the Tower of
London. Well, you can imagine how it was with a young fellow who had never been taken
notice of before, and now all of a sudden couldn’t say a thing that wasn’t taken up and
repeated everywhere; couldn’t stir abroad without constantly overhearing the remark flying
from lip to lip, ‘There he goes; that’s him!’ couldn’t take his breakfast without a crowd to
look on; couldn’t appear in an opera-box without concentrating there the fire of a thousand
lorgnettes. Why, I just swam in glory all day long—that is the amount of it.
You know, I even kept my old suit of rags, and every now and then appeared in them, so as
to have the old pleasure of buying trifles, and being insulted, and then shooting the scoffer
dead with the million-pound bill. But I couldn’t keep that up. The illustrated papers made
the outfit so familiar that when I went out in it I was at once recognised and followed by a
crowd, and if I attempted a purchase the man would offer me his whole shop on credit
before I could pull my note on him.
About the tenth day of my fame I went to fulfil my duty to my flag by paying my respects to
the American minister. He received me with the enthusiasm proper in my case, upbraided
me for being so tardy in my duty, and said that there was only one way to get his
forgiveness, and that was to take the seat at his dinner-party that night made vacant by the
illness of one of his guests. I said I would, and we got to talking. It turned out that he and
my father had been schoolmates in boyhood, Yale students together later, and always warm
friends up to my father’s death. So then he required me to put in at his house all the odd
time I might have to spare, and I was very willing, of course.
In fact I was more than willing; I was glad. When the crash should come, he might somehow
be able to save me from total destruction; I didn’t know how, but he might think of a way,
maybe. I couldn’t venture to unbosom myself to him at this late date, a thing which I would
have been quick to do in the beginning of this awful career of mine in London. No, I
couldn’t venture it now; I was in too deep; that is, too deep for me to be risking revelations
to so new a friend, though not clear beyond my depth, as I looked at it. Because, you see,
with all my borrowing, I was carefully keeping within my means—I mean within my salary.
Of course I couldn’t know what my salary was going to be, but I had a good enough basis for
an estimate in the fact that, if I won the bet, I was to have choice of any situation in that rich
old gentleman’s gift provided I was competent—and I should certainly prove competent; I
hadn’t any doubt about that. And as to the bet, I wasn’t worrying about that; I had always
been lucky. Now, my estimate of the salary was six hundred to a thousand a year; say, six
hundred for the first year, and so on up year by year, till I struck the upper figure by proved
merit. At present I was only in debt for my first year’s salary. Everybody had been trying to
lend me money, but I had fought off the most of them on one pretext or another; so this
indebtedness represented only £300 borrowed money, the other £300 represented my keep
and my purchases. I believed my second year’s salary would carry me through the rest of the
month if I went on being cautious and economical, and I intended to look sharply out for
that. My month ended, my employer back from his journey, I should be all right once more,
for I should at once divide the two years’ salary among my creditors by assignment, and get
right down to my work.
It was a lovely dinner party of fourteen. The Duke and Duchess of Shoreditch, and their
daughter the Lady Anne-Grace-Eleanor-Celeste-and-so-forth-and-so-forth-de-Bohun, the
Earl and Countess of Newgate, Viscount Cheapside, Lord and Lady Blatherskite, some
untitled people of both sexes, the minister and his wife and daughter, and his daughter’s
visiting friend, an English girl of twenty-two, named Portia Langham, whom I fell in love
with in two minutes, and she with me—I could see it without glasses. There was still another
guest, an American—but I am a little ahead of my story. While the people were still in the
drawing-room, whetting up for dinner, and coldly inspecting the late comers, the servant
announced:
‘Mr. Lloyd Hastings.’
The moment the usual civilities were over, Hastings caught sight of me, and came straight
with cordially outstretched hand; then stopped short when about to shake, and said with an
embarrassed look:
‘I beg your pardon, sir, I thought I knew you.’
‘Why, you do know me, old fellow.’
‘No! Are you the—the——?’
‘Vest-pocket monster? I am, indeed. Don’t be afraid to call me by my nickname; I’m used to
it.’
‘Well, well, well, this is a surprise. Once or twice I’ve seen your own name coupled with the
nickname, but it never occurred to me that you could be the Henry Adams referred to. Why,
it isn’t six months since you were clerking away for Blake Hopkins in Frisco on a salary, and
sitting up nights on an extra allowance, helping me arrange and verify the Gould and Curry
Extension papers and statistics. The idea of your being in London, and a vast millionaire,
and a colossal celebrity! Why, it’s the Arabian Nights come again. Man, I can’t take it in at
all; can’t realise it; give me time to settle the whirl in my head.’
‘The fact is, Lloyd, you are no worse off than I am. I can’t realise it myself.’
‘Dear me, it is stunning, now, isn’t it? Why, it’s just three months to-day since we went to
the Miners’ restaurant——’
‘No; the What Cheer.’
‘Right, it was the What Cheer; went there at two in the morning, and had a chop and coffee
after a hard six hours’ grind over those Extension papers, and I tried to persuade you to
come to London with me, and offered to get leave of absence for you and pay all your
expenses, and give you something over if I succeeded in making the sale; and you would not
listen to me, said I wouldn’t succeed, and you couldn’t afford to lose the run of business and
be no end of time getting the hang of things again when you got back home. And yet here
you are. How odd it all is! How did you happen to come, and whatever did give you this
incredible start?’
‘Oh, just an accident. It’s a long story—a romance, a body may say. I’ll tell you all about it,
but not now.
‘When?’
‘The end of this month.’
‘That’s more than a fortnight yet. It’s too much of a strain on a person’s curiosity. Make it a
week.’
‘I can’t. You’ll know why, by and by. But how’s the trade getting along?’

